<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-4" id="chapter-23" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup><h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</h3>
<h4 epub:type="title">Divine Service</h4></hgroup>
<p class="letter">
“Wisdom hath builded herself a house: she hath mingled her wine: she hath
also prepared for herself a table.”
</p>
<p>
The more highly favoured ages of imaginative art present instances of the
summing up of an entire world of complex associations under some single form,
like the Zeus of Olympia, or the series of frescoes which commemorate The Acts
of Saint Francis, at Assisi, or like the play of Hamlet or Faust. It was not in
an image, or series of images, yet still in a sort of dramatic action, and with
the unity of a single appeal to eye and ear, that Marius about this time found
all his new impressions set forth, regarding what he had already recognised,
intellectually, as for him at least the most beautiful thing in the world.
</p>
<p>
To understand the influence upon him of what follows the reader must remember
that it was an experience which came amid a deep sense of vacuity in life. The
fairest products of the earth seemed to be dropping to pieces, as if in
men’s very hands, around him. How real was their sorrow, and his!
“His observation of life” had come to be like the constant telling
of a sorrowful rosary, day after day; till, as if taking infection from the
cloudy sorrow of the mind, the eye also, the very senses, were grown faint and
sick. And now it happened as with the actual morning on which he found himself
a spectator of this new thing. The long winter had been a season of unvarying
sullenness. At last, on this day he awoke with a sharp flash of lightning in
the earliest twilight: in a little while the heavy rain had filtered the air:
the clear light was abroad; and, as though the spring had set in with a sudden
leap in the heart of things, the whole scene around him lay like some
untarnished picture beneath a sky of delicate blue. Under the spell of his late
depression, Marius had suddenly determined to leave Rome for a while. But
desiring first to advertise Cornelius of his movements, and failing to find him
in his lodgings, he had ventured, still early in the day, to seek him in the
Cecilian villa. Passing through its silent and empty court-yard he loitered for
a moment, to admire. Under the clear but immature light of winter morning after
a storm, all the details of form and colour in the old marbles were distinctly
visible, and with a kind of severity or sadness—so it struck
him—amid their beauty: in them, and in all other details of the
scene—the cypresses, the bunches of pale daffodils in the grass, the
curves of the purple hills of Tusculum, with the drifts of virgin snow still
lying in their hollows.
</p>
<p>
The little open door, through which he passed from the court-yard, admitted him
into what was plainly the vast Lararium, or domestic sanctuary, of the Cecilian
family, transformed in many particulars, but still richly decorated, and
retaining much of its ancient furniture in metal-work and costly stone. The
peculiar half-light of dawn seemed to be lingering beyond its hour upon the
solemn marble walls; and here, though at that moment in absolute silence, a
great company of people was assembled. In that brief period of peace, during
which the church emerged for awhile from her jealously-guarded subterranean
life, the rigour of an earlier rule of exclusion had been relaxed. And so it
came to pass that, on this morning Marius saw for the first time the wonderful
spectacle—wonderful, especially, in its evidential power over himself,
over his own thoughts—of those who believe.
</p>
<p>
There were noticeable, among those present, great varieties of rank, of age, of
personal type. The Roman ingenuus, with the white toga and gold ring, stood
side by side with his slave; and the air of the whole company was, above all, a
grave one, an air of recollection. Coming thus unexpectedly upon this large
assembly, so entirely united, in a silence so profound, for purposes unknown to
him, Marius felt for a moment as if he had stumbled by chance upon some great
conspiracy. Yet that could scarcely be, for the people here collected might
have figured as the earliest handsel, or pattern, of a new world, from the very
face of which discontent had passed away. Corresponding to the variety of human
type there present, was the various expression of every form of human sorrow
assuaged. What desire, what fulfilment of desire, had wrought so pathetically
on the features of these ranks of aged men and women of humble condition? Those
young men, bent down so discreetly on the details of their sacred service, had
faced life and were glad, by some science, or light of knowledge they had, to
which there had certainly been no parallel in the older world. Was some
credible message from beyond “the flaming rampart of the
world”—a message of hope, regarding the place of men’s souls
and their interest in the sum of things—already moulding anew their very
bodies, and looks, and voices, now and here? At least, there was a cleansing
and kindling flame at work in them, which seemed to make everything else Marius
had ever known look comparatively vulgar and mean. There were the children,
above all—troops of children—reminding him of those pathetic
children’s graves, like cradles or garden- beds, he had noticed in his
first visit to these places; and they more than satisfied the odd curiosity he
had then conceived about them, wondering in what quaintly expressive forms they
might come forth into the daylight, if awakened from sleep. Children of the
Catacombs, some but “a span long,” with features not so much
beautiful as heroic (that world of new, refining sentiment having set its seal
even on childhood), they retained certainly no stain or trace of anything
subterranean this morning, in the alacrity of their worship—as ready as
if they had been at play—stretching forth their hands, crying, chanting
in a resonant voice, and with boldly upturned faces, Christe Eleison!
</p>
<p>
For the silence—silence, amid those lights of early morning to which
Marius had always been constitutionally impressible, as having in them a
certain reproachful austerity—was broken suddenly by resounding cries of
Kyrie Eleison! Christe Eleison! repeated alternately, again and again, until
the bishop, rising from his chair, made sign that this prayer should cease. But
the voices burst out once more presently, in richer and more varied melody,
though still of an antiphonal character; the men, the women and children, the
deacons, the people, answering one another, somewhat after the manner of a
Greek chorus. But again with what a novelty of poetic accent; what a genuine
expansion of heart; what profound intimations for the intellect, as the meaning
of the words grew upon him! Cum grandi affectu et compunctione
dicatur—says an ancient eucharistic order; and certainly, the mystic tone
of this praying and singing was one with the expression of deliverance, of
grateful assurance and sincerity, upon the faces of those assembled. As if some
searching correction, a regeneration of the body by the spirit, had begun, and
was already gone a great way, the countenances of men, women, and children
alike had a brightness on them which he could fancy reflected upon
himself—an amenity, a mystic amiability and unction, which found its way
most readily of all to the hearts of children themselves. The religious poetry
of those Hebrew psalms—Benedixisti Domine terram tuam: Dixit Dominus
Domino meo, sede a dextris meis—was certainly in marvellous accord with
the lyrical instinct of his own character. Those august hymns, he thought, must
thereafter ever remain by him as among the well-tested powers in things to
soothe and fortify the soul. One could never grow tired of them!
</p>
<p>
In the old pagan worship there had been little to call the understanding into
play. Here, on the other hand, the utterance, the eloquence, the music of
worship conveyed, as Marius readily understood, a fact or series of facts, for
intellectual reception. That became evident, more especially, in those lessons,
or sacred readings, which, like the singing, in broken vernacular Latin,
occurred at certain intervals, amid the silence of the assembly. There were
readings, again with bursts of chanted invocation between for fuller light on a
difficult path, in which many a vagrant voice of human philosophy, haunting
men’s minds from of old, recurred with clearer accent than had ever
belonged to it before, as if lifted, above its first intention, into the
harmonies of some supreme system of knowledge or doctrine, at length complete.
And last of all came a narrative which, with a thousand tender memories, every
one appeared to know by heart, displaying, in all the vividness of a picture
for the eye, the mournful figure of him towards whom this whole act of worship
still consistently turned—a figure which seemed to have absorbed, like
some rich tincture in his garment, all that was deep-felt and impassioned in
the experiences of the past.
</p>
<p>
It was the anniversary of his birth as a little child they celebrated to-day.
Astiterunt reges terrae: so the Gradual, the “Song of Degrees,”
proceeded, the young men on the steps of the altar responding in deep, clear,
antiphon or chorus—
</p>
<p class="poem">
Astiterunt reges terrae—<br>
Adversus sanctum puerum tuum, Jesum:<br>
Nunc, Domine, da servis tuis loqui verbum tuum—<br>
Et signa fieri, per nomen sancti pueri Jesu.
</p>
<p>
And the proper action of the rite itself, like a half-opened book to be read by
the duly initiated mind took up those suggestions, and carried them forward
into the present, as having reference to a power still efficacious, still after
some mystic sense even now in action among the people there assembled. The
entire office, indeed, with its interchange of lessons, hymns, prayer, silence,
was itself like a single piece of highly composite, dramatic music; a
“song of degrees,” rising steadily to a climax. Notwithstanding the
absence of any central image visible to the eye, the entire ceremonial process,
like the place in which it was enacted, was weighty with symbolic significance,
seemed to express a single leading motive. The mystery, if such in fact it was,
centered indeed in the actions of one visible person, distinguished among the
assistants, who stood ranged in semicircle around him, by the extreme fineness
of his white vestments, and the pointed cap with the golden ornaments upon his
head.
</p>
<p>
Nor had Marius ever seen the pontifical character, as he conceived
it—sicut unguentum in capite, descendens in oram vestimenti—so
fully realised, as in the expression, the manner and voice, of this novel
pontiff, as he took his seat on the white chair placed for him by the young
men, and received his long staff into his hand, or moved his hands—hands
which seemed endowed in very deed with some mysterious power—at the
Lavabo, or at the various benedictions, or to bless certain objects on the
table before him, chanting in cadence of a grave sweetness the leading parts of
the rite. What profound unction and mysticity! The solemn character of the
singing was at its height when he opened his lips. Like some new sort of
rhapsôdos, it was for the moment as if he alone possessed the words of the
office, and they flowed anew from some permanent source of inspiration within
him. The table or altar at which he presided, below a canopy on delicate spiral
columns, was in fact the tomb of a youthful “witness,” of the
family of the Cecilii, who had shed his blood not many years before, and whose
relics were still in this place. It was for his sake the bishop put his lips so
often to the surface before him; the regretful memory of that death entwining
itself, though not without certain notes of triumph, as a matter of special
inward significance, throughout a service, which was, before all else, from
first to last, a commemoration of the dead.
</p>
<p>
A sacrifice also,—a sacrifice, it might seem, like the most primitive,
the most natural and enduringly significant of old pagan sacrifices, of the
simplest fruits of the earth. And in connexion with this circumstance again, as
in the actual stones of the building so in the rite itself, what Marius
observed was not so much new matter as a new spirit, moulding, informing, with
a new intention, many observances not witnessed for the first time to-day. Men
and women came to the altar successively, in perfect order, and deposited below
the lattice-work of pierced white marble, their baskets of wheat and grapes,
incense, oil for the sanctuary lamps; bread and wine especially—pure
wheaten bread, the pure white wine of the Tusculan vineyards. There was here a
veritable consecration, hopeful and animating, of the earth’s gifts, of
old dead and dark matter itself, now in some way redeemed at last, of all that
we can touch or see, in the midst of a jaded world that had lost the true sense
of such things, and in strong contrast to the wise emperor’s renunciant
and impassive attitude towards them. Certain portions of that bread and wine
were taken into the bishop’s hands; and thereafter, with an increasing
mysticity and effusion the rite proceeded. Still in a strain of inspired
supplication, the antiphonal singing developed, from this point, into a kind of
dialogue between the chief minister and the whole assisting company—
</p>
<p class="poem">
SURSUM CORDA!<br>
HABEMUS AD DOMINUM.<br>
GRATIAS AGAMUS DOMINO DEO NOSTRO!—
</p>
<p>
It might have been thought the business, the duty or service of young men more
particularly, as they stood there in long ranks, and in severe and simple
vesture of the purest white—a service in which they would seem to be
flying for refuge, as with their precious, their treacherous and critical youth
in their hands, to one—Yes! one like themselves, who yet claimed their
worship, a worship, above all, in the way of Aurelius, in the way of imitation.
Adoramus te Christe, quia per crucem tuam redemisti mundum!—they cry
together. So deep is the emotion that at moments it seems to Marius as if some
there present apprehend that prayer prevails, that the very object of this
pathetic crying himself draws near. From the first there had been the sense, an
increasing assurance, of one coming:—actually with them now, according to
the oft-repeated affirmation or petition, Dominus vobiscum! Some at least were
quite sure of it; and the confidence of this remnant fired the hearts, and gave
meaning to the bold, ecstatic worship, of all the rest about them.
</p>
<p>
Prompted especially by the suggestions of that mysterious old Jewish psalmody,
so new to him—lesson and hymn—and catching therewith a portion of
the enthusiasm of those beside him, Marius could discern dimly, behind the
solemn recitation which now followed, at once a narrative and a prayer, the
most touching image truly that had ever come within the scope of his mental or
physical gaze. It was the image of a young man giving up voluntarily, one by
one, for the greatest of ends, the greatest gifts; actually parting with
himself, above all, with the serenity, the divine serenity, of his own soul;
yet from the midst of his desolation crying out upon the greatness of his
success, as if foreseeing this very worship.* As centre of the supposed facts
which for these people were become so constraining a motive of hopefulness, of
activity, that image seemed to display itself with an overwhelming claim on
human gratitude. What Saint Lewis of France discerned, and found so
irresistibly touching, across the dimness of many centuries, as a painful thing
done for love of him by one he had never seen, was to them almost as a thing of
yesterday; and their hearts were whole with it. It had the force, among their
interests, of an almost recent event in the career of one whom their
fathers’ fathers might have known. From memories so sublime, yet so close
at hand, had the narrative descended in which these acts of worship centered;
though again the names of some more recently dead were mingled in it. And it
seemed as if the very dead were aware; to be stirring beneath the slabs of the
sepulchres which lay so near, that they might associate themselves to this
enthusiasm—to this exalted worship of Jesus.
</p>
<p class="footnote">
* Psalm xxii. 22-31.
</p>
<p>
One by one, at last, the faithful approach to receive from the chief minister
morsels of the great, white, wheaten cake, he had taken into his
hands—Perducat vos ad vitam aeternam! he prays, half-silently, as they
depart again, after discreet embraces. The Eucharist of those early days was,
even more entirely than at any later or happier time, an act of thanksgiving;
and while the remnants of the feast are borne away for the reception of the
sick, the sustained gladness of the rite reaches its highest point in the
singing of a hymn: a hymn like the spontaneous product of two opposed militant
companies, contending accordantly together, heightening, accumulating, their
witness, provoking one another’s worship, in a kind of sacred rivalry.
</p>
<p>
Ite! Missa est!—cried the young deacons: and Marius departed from that
strange scene along with the rest. What was it?—Was it this made the way
of Cornelius so pleasant through the world? As for Marius himself,—the
natural soul of worship in him had at last been satisfied as never before. He
felt, as he left that place, that he must hereafter experience often a longing
memory, a kind of thirst, for all this, over again. And it seemed moreover to
define what he must require of the powers, whatsoever they might be, that had
brought him into the world at all, to make him not unhappy in it.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
