<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-4" id="chapter-25" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup><h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h3>
<h4 epub:type="title" xml:lang="la">Sunt Lacrimae Rerum<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-24" id="noteref-24" epub:type="noteref">24</a></h4></hgroup>
<p>
It was become a habit with Marius—one of his modernisms—developed
by his assistance at the Emperor’s “conversations with
himself,” to keep a register of the movements of his own private thoughts
and humours; not continuously indeed, yet sometimes for lengthy intervals,
during which it was no idle self-indulgence, but a necessity of his
intellectual life, to “confess himself,” with an intimacy,
seemingly rare among the ancients; ancient writers, at all events, having been
jealous, for the most part, of affording us so much as a glimpse of that
interior self, which in many cases would have actually doubled the interest of
their objective informations.
</p>
<p>
“If a particular tutelary or genius,” writes
Marius,—“according to old belief, walks through life beside each
one of us, mine is very certainly a capricious creature. He fills one with
wayward, unaccountable, yet quite irresistible humours, and seems always to be
in collusion with some outward circumstance, often trivial enough in
itself—the condition of the weather, forsooth!—the people one meets
by chance—the things one happens to overhear them say, veritable <i xml:lang="el">ἐνόδιοι σύμβολοι</i>, or omens by the wayside, as the old Greeks fancied—to push on
the unreasonable prepossessions of the moment into weighty motives. It was
doubtless a quite explicable, physical fatigue that presented me to myself, on
awaking this morning, so lack-lustre and trite. But I must needs take my
petulance, contrasting it with my accustomed morning hopefulness, as a sign of
the ageing of appetite, of a decay in the very capacity of enjoyment. We need
some imaginative stimulus, some not impossible ideal such as may shape vague
hope, and transform it into effective desire, to carry us year after year,
without disgust, through the routine-work which is so large a part of life.
“Then, how if appetite, be it for real or ideal, should itself fail one
after awhile? Ah, yes! is it of cold always that men die; and on some of us it
creeps very gradually. In truth, I can remember just such a lack-lustre
condition of feeling once or twice before. But I note, that it was accompanied
then by an odd indifference, as the thought of them occurred to me, in regard
to the sufferings of others—a kind of callousness, so unusual with me, as
at once to mark the humour it accompanied as a palpably morbid one that could
not last. Were those sufferings, great or little, I asked myself then, of more
real consequence to them than mine to me, as I remind myself that
‘nothing that will end is really long’—long enough to be
thought of importance? But to-day, my own sense of fatigue, the pity I conceive
for myself, disposed me strongly to a tenderness for others. For a moment the
whole world seemed to present itself as a hospital of sick persons; many of
them sick in mind; all of whom it would be a brutality not to humour, not to
indulge.
</p>
<p id="p-3">
“Why, when I went out to walk off my wayward fancies, did I confront the
very sort of incident (my unfortunate genius had surely beckoned it from afar
to vex me) likely to irritate them further? A party of men were coming down the
street. They were leading a fine race-horse; a handsome beast, but badly hurt
somewhere, in the circus, and useless. They were taking him to slaughter; and I
think the animal knew it: he cast such looks, as if of mad appeal, to those who
passed him, as he went among the strangers to whom his former owner had
committed him, to die, in his beauty and pride, for just that one mischance or
fault; although the morning air was still so animating, and pleasant to snuff.
I could have fancied a human soul in the creature, swelling against its luck.
And I had come across the incident just when it would figure to me as the very
symbol of our poor humanity, in its capacities for pain, its wretched
accidents, and those imperfect sympathies, which can never quite identify us
with one another; the very power of utterance and appeal to others seeming to
fail us, in proportion as our sorrows come home to ourselves, are really our
own. We are constructed for suffering! What proofs of it does but one day
afford, if we care to note them, as we go—a whole long chaplet of
sorrowful mysteries! <i xml:lang="la">Sunt lacrimae rerum et mentem mortalia tangunt.</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-25" id="noteref-25" epub:type="noteref">25</a>
</p>
<p>
“Men’s fortunes touch us! The little children of one of those
institutions for the support of orphans, now become fashionable among us by way
of memorial of eminent persons deceased, are going, in long file, along the
street, on their way to a holiday in the country. They halt, and count
themselves with an air of triumph, to show that they are all there. Their gay
chatter has disturbed a little group of peasants; a young woman and her
husband, who have brought the old mother, now past work and witless, to place
her in a house provided for such afflicted people. They are fairly
affectionate, but anxious how the thing they have to do may go—hope only
she may permit them to leave her there behind quietly. And the poor old soul is
excited by the noise made by the children, and partly aware of what is going to
happen with her. She too begins to count—one, two, three, five—on
her trembling fingers, misshapen by a life of toil.
</p>
<p>
‘Yes! yes! and twice five make ten’—they say, to pacify her.
It is her last appeal to be taken home again; her proof that all is not yet up
with her; that she is, at all events, still as capable as those joyous
children.
</p>
<p>
“At the baths, a party of labourers are at work upon one of the great
brick furnaces, in a cloud of black dust. A frail young child has brought food
for one of them, and sits apart, waiting till his father comes—watching
the labour, but with a sorrowful distaste for the din and dirt. He is regarding
wistfully his own place in the world, there before him. His mind, as he
watches, is grown up for a moment; and he foresees, as it were, in that moment,
all the long tale of days, of early awakings, of his own coming life of
drudgery at work like this.
</p>
<p>
“A man comes along carrying a boy whose rough work has already
begun—the only child—whose presence beside him sweetened the
father’s toil a little. The boy has been badly injured by a fall of
brick-work, yet, with an effort, he rides boldly on his father’s
shoulders. It will be the way of natural affection to keep him alive as long as
possible, though with that miserably shattered body.—‘Ah! with us
still, and feeling our care beside him!’—and yet surely not without
a heartbreaking sigh of relief, alike from him and them, when the end comes.
</p>
<p>
“On the alert for incidents like these, yet of necessity passing them by
on the other side, I find it hard to get rid of a sense that I, for one, have
failed in love. I could yield to the humour till I seemed to have had my share
in those great public cruelties, the shocking legal crimes which are on record,
like that cold-blooded slaughter, according to law, of the four hundred slaves
in the reign of Nero, because one of their number was thought to have murdered
his master. The reproach of that, together with the kind of facile apologies
those who had no share in the deed may have made for it, as they went about
quietly on their own affairs that day, seems to come very close to me, as I
think upon it. And to how many of those now actually around me, whose life is a
sore one, must I be indifferent, if I ever become aware of their soreness at
all? To some, perhaps, the necessary conditions of my own life may cause me to
be opposed, in a kind of natural conflict, regarding those interests which
actually determine the happiness of theirs. I would that a stronger love might
arise in my heart!
</p>
<p>
“Yet there is plenty of charity in the world. My patron, the Stoic
emperor, has made it even fashionable. To celebrate one of his brief returns to
Rome lately from the war, over and above a largess of gold pieces to all who
would, the public debts were forgiven. He made a nice show of it: for once, the
Romans entertained themselves with a good-natured spectacle, and the whole town
came to see the great bonfire in the Forum, into which all bonds and evidence
of debt were thrown on delivery, by the emperor himself; many private creditors
following his example. That was done well enough! But still the feeling returns
to me, that no charity of ours can get at a certain natural unkindness which I
find in things themselves.
</p>
<p>
“When I first came to Rome, eager to observe its religion, especially its
antiquities of religious usage, I assisted at the most curious, perhaps, of
them all, the most distinctly marked with that immobility which is a sort of
ideal in the Roman religion. The ceremony took place at a singular spot some
miles distant from the city, among the low hills on the bank of the Tiber,
beyond the Aurelian Gate. There, in a little wood of venerable trees, piously
allowed their own way, age after age—ilex and cypress remaining where
they fell at last, one over the other, and all caught, in that early May-time,
under a riotous tangle of wild clematis—was to be found a magnificent
sanctuary, in which the members of the Arval College assembled themselves on
certain days. The axe never touched those trees—Nay! it was forbidden to
introduce any iron thing whatsoever within the precincts; not only because the
deities of these quiet places hate to be disturbed by the harsh noise of metal,
but also in memory of that better age—the lost Golden Age—the
homely age of the potters, of which the central act of the festival was a
commemoration.
</p>
<p>
“The preliminary ceremonies were long and complicated, but of a character
familiar enough. Peculiar to the time and place was the solemn exposition,
after lavation of hands, processions backwards and forwards, and certain
changes of vestments, of the identical earthen vessels—veritable relics
of the old religion of Numa!—the vessels from which the holy Numa himself
had eaten and drunk, set forth above a kind of altar, amid a cloud of flowers
and incense, and many lights, for the veneration of the credulous or the
faithful.
</p>
<p>
“They were, in fact, cups or vases of burnt clay, rude in form: and the
religious veneration thus offered to them expressed men’s desire to give
honour to a simpler age, before iron had found place in human life: the
persuasion that that age was worth remembering: a hope that it might come
again.
</p>
<p>
“That a Numa, and his age of gold, would return, has been the hope or the
dream of some, in every period. Yet if he did come back, or any equivalent of
his presence, he could but weaken, and by no means smite through, that root of
evil, certainly of sorrow, of outraged human sense, in things, which one must
carefully distinguish from all preventible accidents. Death, and the little
perpetual daily dyings, which have something of its sting, he must necessarily
leave untouched. And, methinks, that were all the rest of man’s life
framed entirely to his liking, he would straightway begin to sadden himself,
over the fate—say, of the flowers! For there is, there has come to be
since Numa lived perhaps, a capacity for sorrow in his heart, which grows with
all the growth, alike of the individual and of the race, in intellectual
delicacy and power, and which will find its aliment.
</p>
<p>
“Of that sort of golden age, indeed, one discerns even now a trace, here
and there. Often have I maintained that, in this generous southern country at
least, Epicureanism is the special philosophy of the poor. How little I myself
really need, when people leave me alone, with the intellectual powers at work
serenely. The drops of falling water, a few wild flowers with their priceless
fragrance, a few tufts even of half-dead leaves, changing colour in the quiet
of a room that has but light and shadow in it; these, for a susceptible mind,
might well do duty for all the glory of Augustus. I notice sometimes what I
conceive to be the precise character of the fondness of the roughest
working-people for their young children, a fine appreciation, not only of their
serviceable affection, but of their visible graces: and indeed, in this
country, the children are almost always worth looking at. I see daily, in fine
weather, a child like a delicate nosegay, running to meet the rudest of brick-
makers as he comes from work. She is not at all afraid to hang upon his rough
hand: and through her, he reaches out to, he makes his own, something from that
strange region, so distant from him yet so real, of the world’s
refinement. What is of finer soul, of finer stuff in things, and demands
delicate touching—to him the delicacy of the little child represents
that: it initiates him into that. There, surely, is a touch of the secular
gold, of a perpetual age of gold. But then again, think for a moment, with what
a hard humour at the nature of things, his struggle for bare life will go on,
if the child should happen to die. I observed to-day, under one of the archways
of the baths, two children at play, a little seriously—a fair girl and
her crippled younger brother. Two toy chairs and a little table, and sprigs of
fir set upright in the sand for a garden! They played at housekeeping. Well!
the girl thinks her life a perfectly good thing in the service of this crippled
brother. But she will have a jealous lover in time: and the boy, though his
face is not altogether unpleasant, is after all a hopeless cripple.
</p>
<p>
“For there is a certain grief in things as they are, in man as he has
come to be, as he certainly is, over and above those griefs of circumstance
which are in a measure removable—some inexplicable shortcoming, or
misadventure, on the part of nature itself—death, and old age as it must
needs be, and that watching for their approach, which makes every stage of life
like a dying over and over again. Almost all death is painful, and in every
thing that comes to an end a touch of death, and therefore of wretched coldness
struck home to one, of remorse, of loss and parting, of outraged attachments.
Given faultless men and women, given a perfect state of society which should
have no need to practise on men’s susceptibilities for its own selfish
ends, adding one turn more to the wheel of the great rack for its own interest
or amusement, there would still be this evil in the world, of a certain
necessary sorrow and desolation, felt, just in proportion to the moral, or
nervous perfection men have attained to. And what we need in the world, over
against that, is a certain permanent and general power of
compassion—humanity’s standing force of self-pity—as an
elementary ingredient of our social atmosphere, if we are to live in it at all.
I wonder, sometimes, in what way man has cajoled himself into the bearing of
his burden thus far, seeing how every step in the capacity of apprehension his
labour has won for him, from age to age, must needs increase his dejection. It
is as if the increase of knowledge were but an increasing revelation of the
radical hopelessness of his position: and I would that there were one even as
I, behind this vain show of things!
</p>
<p>
“At all events, the actual conditions of our life being as they are, and
the capacity for suffering so large a principle in things—since the only
principle, perhaps, to which we may always safely trust is a ready sympathy
with the pain one actually sees—it follows that the practical and
effective difference between men will lie in their power of insight into those
conditions, their power of sympathy. The future will be with those who have
most of it; while for the present, as I persuade myself, those who have much of
it, have something to hold by, even in the dissolution of a world, or in that
dissolution of self, which is, for every one, no less than the dissolution of
the world it represents for him. Nearly all of us, I suppose, have had our
moments, in which any effective sympathy for us on the part of others has
seemed impossible; in which our pain has seemed a stupid outrage upon us, like
some overwhelming physical violence, from which we could take refuge, at best,
only in some mere general sense of goodwill—somewhere in the world
perhaps. And then, to one’s surprise, the discovery of that goodwill, if
it were only in a not unfriendly animal, may seem to have explained, to have
actually justified to us, the fact of our pain. There have been occasions,
certainly, when I have felt that if others cared for me as I cared for them, it
would be, not so much a consolation, as an equivalent, for what one has lost or
suffered: a realised profit on the summing up of one’s accounts: a
touching of that absolute ground amid all the changes of phenomena, such as our
philosophers have of late confessed themselves quite unable to discover. In the
mere clinging of human creatures to each other, nay! in one’s own
solitary self-pity, amid the effects even of what might appear irredeemable
loss, I seem to touch the eternal. Something in that pitiful contact, something
new and true, fact or apprehension of fact, is educed, which, on a review of
all the perplexities of life, satisfies our moral sense, and removes that
appearance of unkindness in the soul of things themselves, and assures us that
not everything has been in vain.
</p>
<p>
“And I know not how, but in the thought thus suggested, I seem to take
up, and re-knit myself to, a well-remembered hour, when by some gracious
accident—it was on a journey—all things about me fell into a more
perfect harmony than is their wont. Everything seemed to be, for a moment,
after all, almost for the best. Through the train of my thoughts, one against
another, it was as if I became aware of the dominant power of another person in
controversy, wrestling with me. I seem to be come round to the point at which I
left off then. The antagonist has closed with me again. A protest comes, out of
the very depths of man’s radically hopeless condition in the world, with
the energy of one of those suffering yet prevailing deities, of which old
poetry tells. Dared one hope that there is a heart, even as ours, in that
divine ‘Assistant’ of one’s thoughts—a heart even as
mine, behind this vain show of things!”
</p>


		</section>
	</body>
</html>
