<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter" data-parent="part-1">
			
<hgroup>
<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
<h4 epub:type="title">A Pagan End</h4></hgroup>

<p>
For the fantastical colleague of the philosophic emperor Marcus Aurelius,
returning in triumph from the East, had brought in his train, among the enemies
of Rome, one by no means a captive. People actually sickened at a sudden touch
of the unsuspected foe, as they watched in dense crowds the pathetic or
grotesque imagery of failure or success in the triumphal procession. And, as
usual, the plague brought with it a power to develop all pre-existent germs of
superstition. It was by dishonour done to Apollo himself, said popular
rumour—to Apollo, the old titular divinity of pestilence, that the
poisonous thing had come abroad. Pent up in a golden coffer consecrated to the
god, it had escaped in the sacrilegious plundering of his temple at Seleucia by
the soldiers of Lucius Verus, after a traitorous surprise of that town and a
cruel massacre. Certainly there was something which baffled all imaginable
precautions and all medical science, in the suddenness with which the disease
broke out simultaneously, here and there, among both soldiers and citizens,
even in places far remote from the main line of its march in the rear of the
victorious army. It seemed to have invaded the whole empire, and some have even
thought that, in a mitigated form, it permanently remained there. In Rome
itself many thousands perished; and old authorities tell of farmsteads, whole
towns, and even entire neighbourhoods, which from that time continued without
inhabitants and lapsed into wildness or ruin.
</p>

<p>
Flavian lay at the open window of his lodging, with a fiery pang in the brain,
fancying no covering thin or light enough to be applied to his body. His head
being relieved after a while, there was distress at the chest. It was but the
fatal course of the strange new sickness, under many disguises; travelling from
the brain to the feet, like a material resident, weakening one after another of
the organic centres; often, when it did not kill, depositing various degrees of
lifelong infirmity in this member or that; and after such descent, returning
upwards again, now as a mortal coldness, leaving the entrenchments of the
fortress of life overturned, one by one, behind it.
</p>

<p>
Flavian lay there, with the enemy at his breast now in a painful cough, but
relieved from that burning fever in the head, amid the rich-scented
flowers—rare Paestum roses, and the like —procured by Marius for
his solace, in a fancied convalescence; and would, at intervals, return to
labour at his verses, with a great eagerness to complete and transcribe the
work, while Marius sat and wrote at his dictation, one of the latest but not
the poorest specimens of genuine Latin poetry.
</p>

<p>
It was in fact a kind of nuptial hymn, which, taking its start from the thought
of nature as the universal mother, celebrated the preliminary pairing and
mating together of all fresh things, in the hot and genial
spring-time—the immemorial nuptials of the soul of spring itself and the
brown earth; and was full of a delighted, mystic sense of what passed between
them in that fantastic marriage. That mystic burden was relieved, at intervals,
by the familiar playfulness of the Latin verse-writer in dealing with
mythology, which, though coming at so late a day, had still a wonderful
freshness in its old age.—“Amor has put his weapons by and will
keep holiday. He was bidden go without apparel, that none might be wounded by
his bow and arrows. But take care! In truth he is none the less armed than
usual, though he be all unclad.”
</p>

<p>
In the expression of all this Flavian seemed, while making it his chief aim to
retain the opulent, many-syllabled vocabulary of the Latin genius, at some
points even to have advanced beyond it, in anticipation of wholly new laws of
taste as regards sound, a new range of sound itself. The peculiar resultant
note, associating itself with certain other experiences of his, was to Marius
like the foretaste of an entirely novel world of poetic beauty to come. Flavian
had caught, indeed, something of the rhyming cadence, the sonorous organ-music
of the medieval Latin, and therewithal something of its unction and mysticity
of spirit. There was in his work, along with the last splendour of the
classical language, a touch, almost prophetic, of that transformed life it was
to have in the rhyming middle age, just about to dawn. The impression thus
forced upon Marius connected itself with a feeling, the exact inverse of that,
known to every one, which seems to say, You have been just here, just thus,
before!—a feeling, in his case, not reminiscent but prescient of the
future, which passed over him afterwards many times, as he came across certain
places and people. It was as if he detected there the process of actual change
to a wholly undreamed-of and renewed condition of human body and soul: as if he
saw the heavy yet decrepit old Roman architecture about him, rebuilding on an
intrinsically better pattern. Could it have been actually on a new musical
instrument that Flavian had first heard the novel accents of his verse? And
still Marius noticed there, amid all its richness of expression and imagery,
that firmness of outline he had always relished so much in the composition of
Flavian. Yes! a firmness like that of some master of noble metal-work,
manipulating tenacious bronze or gold. Even now that haunting refrain, with its
impromptu variations, from the throats of those strong young men, came floating
through the window.
</p>

<p class="poem">
Cras amet qui nunquam amavit,<br />
Quique amavit cras amet!
</p>

<p class="noindent">
—repeated Flavian, tremulously, dictating yet one stanza more.
</p>

<p>
What he was losing, his freehold of a soul and body so fortunately endowed, the
mere liberty of life above-ground, “those sunny mornings in the
cornfields by the sea,” as he recollected them one day, when the window
was thrown open upon the early freshness—his sense of all this, was from
the first singularly near and distinct, yet rather as of something he was but
debarred the use of for a time than finally bidding farewell to. That was while
he was still with no very grave misgivings as to the issue of his sickness, and
felt the sources of life still springing essentially unadulterate within him.
From time to time, indeed, Marius, labouring eagerly at the poem from his
dictation, was haunted by a feeling of the triviality of such work just then.
The recurrent sense of some obscure danger beyond the mere danger of death,
vaguer than that and by so much the more terrible, like the menace of some
shadowy adversary in the dark with whose mode of attack they had no
acquaintance, disturbed him now and again through those hours of excited
attention to his manuscript, and to the purely physical wants of Flavian.
Still, during these three days there was much hope and cheerfulness, and even
jesting. Half-consciously Marius tried to prolong one or another relieving
circumstance of the day, the preparations for rest and morning refreshment, for
instance; sadly making the most of the little luxury of this or that, with
something of the feigned cheer of the mother who sets her last morsels before
her famished child as for a feast, but really that he “may eat it and
die.”
</p>

<p>
On the afternoon of the seventh day he allowed Marius finally to put aside the
unfinished manuscript. For the enemy, leaving the chest quiet at length though
much exhausted, had made itself felt with full power again in a painful
vomiting, which seemed to shake his body asunder, with great consequent
prostration. From that time the distress increased rapidly downwards. Omnia tum
vero vitai claustra lababant;+ and soon the cold was mounting with sure pace
from the dead feet to the head.
</p>

<p>
And now Marius began more than to suspect what the issue must be, and
henceforward could but watch with a sort of agonised fascination the rapid but
systematic work of the destroyer, faintly relieving a little the mere accidents
of the sharper forms of suffering. Flavian himself appeared, in full
consciousness at last—in clear-sighted, deliberate estimate of the actual
crisis—to be doing battle with his adversary. His mind surveyed, with
great distinctness, the various suggested modes of relief. He must without fail
get better, he would fancy, might he be removed to a certain place on the hills
where as a child he had once recovered from sickness, but found that he could
scarcely raise his head from the pillow without giddiness. As if now surely
foreseeing the end, he would set himself, with an eager effort, and with that
eager and angry look, which is noted as one of the premonitions of death in
this disease, to fashion out, without formal dictation, still a few more broken
verses of his unfinished work, in hard-set determination, defiant of pain, to
arrest this or that little drop at least from the river of sensuous imagery
rushing so quickly past him.
</p>

<p>
But at length delirium—symptom that the work of the plague was done, and
the last resort of life yielding to the enemy—broke the coherent order of
words and thoughts; and Marius, intent on the coming agony, found his best hope
in the increasing dimness of the patient’s mind. In intervals of clearer
consciousness the visible signs of cold, of sorrow and desolation, were very
painful. No longer battling with the disease, he seemed as it were to place
himself at the disposal of the victorious foe, dying passively, like some dumb
creature, in hopeless acquiescence at last. That old, half-pleading petulance,
unamiable, yet, as it might seem, only needing conditions of life a little
happier than they had actually been, to become refinement of affection, a
delicate grace in its demand on the sympathy of others, had changed in those
moments of full intelligence to a clinging and tremulous gentleness, as he
lay—“on the very threshold of death”—with a sharply
contracted hand in the hand of Marius, to his almost surprised joy, winning him
now to an absolutely self-forgetful devotion. There was a new sort of pleading
in the misty eyes, just because they took such unsteady note of him, which made
Marius feel as if guilty; anticipating thus a form of self-reproach with which
even the tenderest ministrant may be sometimes surprised, when, at death,
affectionate labour suddenly ceasing leaves room for the suspicion of some
failure of love perhaps, at one or another minute point in it. Marius almost
longed to take his share in the suffering, that he might understand so the
better how to relieve it.
</p>

<p>
It seemed that the light of the lamp distressed the patient, and Marius
extinguished it. The thunder which had sounded all day among the hills, with a
heat not unwelcome to Flavian, had given way at nightfall to steady rain; and
in the darkness Marius lay down beside him, faintly shivering now in the sudden
cold, to lend him his own warmth, undeterred by the fear of contagion which had
kept other people from passing near the house. At length about day-break he
perceived that the last effort had come with a revival of mental clearness, as
Marius understood by the contact, light as it was, in recognition of him there.
“Is it a comfort,” he whispered then, “that I shall often
come and weep over you?”—“Not unless I be aware, and hear you
weeping!”
</p>

<p>
The sun shone out on the people going to work for a long hot day, and Marius
was standing by the dead, watching, with deliberate purpose to fix in his
memory every detail, that he might have this picture in reserve, should any
hour of forgetfulness hereafter come to him with the temptation to feel
completely happy again. A feeling of outrage, of resentment against nature
itself, mingled with an agony of pity, as he noted on the now placid features a
certain look of humility, almost abject, like the expression of a smitten child
or animal, as of one, fallen at last, after bewildering struggle, wholly under
the power of a merciless adversary. From mere tenderness of soul he would not
forget one circumstance in all that; as a man might piously stamp on his memory
the death-scene of a brother wrongfully condemned to die, against a time that
may come.
</p>

<p>
The fear of the corpse, which surprised him in his effort to watch by it
through the darkness, was a hint of his own failing strength, just in time. The
first night after the washing of the body, he bore stoutly enough the tax which
affection seemed to demand, throwing the incense from time to time on the
little altar placed beside the bier. It was the recurrence of the
thing—that unchanged outline below the coverlet, amid a silence in which
the faintest rustle seemed to speak—that finally overcame his
determination. Surely, here, in this alienation, this sense of distance between
them, which had come over him before though in minor degree when the mind of
Flavian had wandered in his sickness, was another of the pains of death. Yet he
was able to make all due preparations, and go through the ceremonies, shortened
a little because of the infection, when, on a cloudless evening, the funeral
procession went forth; himself, the flames of the pyre having done their work,
carrying away the urn of the deceased, in the folds of his toga, to its last
resting-place in the cemetery beside the highway, and so turning home to sleep
in his own desolate lodging.
</p>

<p class="poem">
Quis desiderio sit pudor aut modus<br />
    Tam cari capitis?—+
</p>

<p>
What thought of others’ thoughts about one could there be with the regret
for “so dear a head” fresh at one’s heart?
</p>

<p class="footnote">
NOTES
</p>

<p class="footnote">
116. +Lucretius, Book VI.1153.
</p>

<p class="footnote">
120. +Horace, Odes I.xxiv.1-2.
</p>
</section></body></html>
